AI Learning and Course Management Platform A PROJECT REPORT

Submitted by



Shraddhaba Digvijaysinh Rana

230263107029



In partial fulfillment for the award of the degree of

BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING

in

COMPUTER ENGINEERING







KALOL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH CENTRE, KALOL

At- Kalol May 2026-27



				

CERTIFICATE





This Is To Certify That The Internship Report Submitted Along With The Project Entitled AI Learning and Course Management Platform Has Been Carried Out By Shraddhaba Digvijaysinh Rana Under My Guidance In Partial Fulfillment For The Degree Of Bachelor Of Engineering In Computer Engineering, 8th Semester Of Kalol Institute Of Technology & Research Centre, Kalol During The Academic Year 2026-27.















Prof. Mr. Saumil Barot	Prof. . Mrs Tejal Purani

Internal Guide	Head of Department





							

Faculty of Engineering



DECLARATION







I hereby declare that the Internship Report submitted along with the Internship Project entitled “AI Learning and Course Management Platform” in partial fulfillment for the degree of Bachelor of Engineering in Computer Engineering to Kalol Institute of Technology & Research Centre, Kalol, is a Bonafide record of original work carried out by me during the internship.



I further declare that this project work has been completed under the guidance of Prof. Mr. Saumil Barot, and has not been submitted elsewhere for the award of any degree or diploma. No part of this report has been directly copied from any other student’s work or from any external source without proper acknowledgment and reference.









Shraddhaba Digvijaysinh Rana		



ACKNOWLEDGMENT





I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all those who have contributed to the successful completion of this project titled “AI Learning and Course Management Platform.”

First and foremost, I am deeply thankful to my project guide, Mr. Saumil Barot, for their continuous support, valuable guidance, and encouragement throughout the development of this project. Their insights and suggestions played a crucial role in shaping the direction and quality of the work.

I would also like to extend my gratitude to the Head of the Department, Mrs Tejal Purani, and all the faculty members of the Computer Engineering, Kalol Institute of Technology & Research Centre, Kalol, for providing the necessary resources and academic environment to carry out this project successfully.

I am grateful to VEER COMPUTING & CONSULTANCY, Ahmedabad. for giving me the opportunity to work on this project and for their support during the internship/project duration.

I would also like to thank my teammates and peers for their cooperation, support, and constructive feedback throughout the project development process.

Finally, I express my heartfelt gratitude to my family for their constant encouragement and support, which motivated me to complete this project successfully





















Yours Sincerely, Shraddhaba Digvijaysinh Rana







ABSTRACT



The rapid advancement of digital technologies has transformed traditional education systems into more flexible and accessible digital learning environments. Institutions and organizations increasingly require efficient systems to manage courses, students, and learning resources. This project presents the development of an AI Learning and Course Management Platform, a web-based system designed to integrate academic learning, online courses, and business training within a unified environment.

The proposed system addresses key challenges in existing manual and semi-digital systems, such as inefficient course management, difficulty in tracking student performance, lack of centralized resources, and absence of intelligent decision-making support. The platform provides features including course management, student enrollment, webinar management, resource sharing, and performance tracking.



A major contribution of this system is the integration of Artificial Intelligence to enhance learning outcomes. AI modules provide personalized course recommendations based on student behavior, performance analysis through data-driven insights, automated webinar summaries, and an intelligent learning assistant to guide students.



The system is developed using modern web technologies such as SvelteKit for frontend and backend integration, PostgreSQL/SQLite for database management, and AI APIs for intelligent features. The platform supports multiple user roles including Admin, Instructor, Student, and Business Manager, each with defined access control.



The proposed solution improves learning efficiency, enhances engagement, and provides scalable infrastructure for both educational institutions and corporate training environments. This project demonstrates how AI-driven systems can revolutionize learning management by combining automation, analytics, and user-centric design.



List of Figures

Fig. No.

Title

Page No.

Fig 2.1

Use Case Diagram



Fig 2.2

Activity Diagram



Fig 2.3

Data Flow Diagram (DFD Level 1)



Fig 3.1

System Architecture Diagram



Fig 3.2

Entity Relationship (ER) Diagram







List of Tables



Table No.

Title

Page No.

Table 5.3

Test Cases and Results



Table B.1

User Table Example



Table B.2

Course Table Example



Table D.1

Detailed Test Case Inputs and Outputs





Abbreviations

Abbreviation

Full Form

AI

Artificial Intelligence

LMS

Learning Management System

API

Application Programming Interface

UI

User Interface

UX

User Experience

DB

Database

ER

Entity Relationship

DFD

Data Flow Diagram

HTML

HyperText Markup Language

CSS

Cascading Style Sheets

JS

JavaScript

UAT

User Acceptance Testing

SQL

Structured Query Language





Table of Contents

Sr. No.

Particulars

Page No.

1

Acknowledgement



2

Abstract



3

List of Figures



4

List of Tables



5

List of Abbreviations



6

Chapter 1: Introduction



6.1

1.1 Project Summary



6.2

1.2 Purpose



6.3

1.3 Objectives



6.4

1.4 Scope



6.5

1.5 Technology



6.6

1.6 Project Planning



6.7

1.7 Project Scheduling



7

Chapter 2: System Analysis



7.1

2.1 Study of Current System



7.2

2.2 Problems in Current System



7.3

2.3 Requirements of New System



7.4

2.4 System Feasibility



7.5

2.5 Process in Proposed System



7.6

2.6 Use Case Diagram



7.7

2.7 Activity Diagram



7.8

2.8 Data Flow Diagram



7.9

2.9 Features



7.10

2.10 System Modules



7.11

2.11 Selection of Technology



8

Chapter 3: System Design



8.1

3.1 Design Methodology



8.2

3.2 System Architecture



8.3

3.3 Database Design (ER Diagram)



8.4

3.4 Data Structure Design



8.5

3.5 Input and Output Design



8.6

3.6 Interface Design



8.7

3.7 Security and Access Control



8.9

3.8 Design Constraints



8.10

3.9 Design Justification



9

Chapter 4: Implementation



10

Chapter 5: Testing



11

Chapter 6: Conclusion & Discussion



12

References



13

Appendix



13.1

Appendix A: Sample Screens (UI Representation)



13.2

Appendix B: Sample Database Tables



13.3

Appendix C: Sample Code Snippet



13.4

Appendix D: Test Case Details



13.5

Appendix E: Project Screenshots / Output Results













CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION TO INTERNSHIP PROJECT

Project - Internship Summary



The project titled “AI Learning and Course Management Platform” is a web-based application designed to manage and enhance digital learning environments. The system integrates course management, student enrollment, webinar handling, resource sharing, and AI-driven features into a unified platform.

The primary goal of the system is to simplify learning management while improving user experience through intelligent automation and data-driven insights. The platform supports multiple user roles including Admin, Instructor, Student, and Business Manager.



Purpose



The purpose of this project is to develop a centralized and intelligent system that addresses the limitations of traditional and existing digital learning platforms. The system aims to improve efficiency in managing educational content and provide enhanced learning support using AI technologies.

1.3 Objectives



To design a scalable web-based learning management system

To enable efficient course and user management

To provide online learning support through webinars

To integrate AI features such as recommendations and performance analysis

To improve user engagement and learning outcomes



1.4 Scope

The system is intended for educational institutions, training organizations, and businesses. It allows users to create, manage, and access learning content efficiently.

Scope Includes:

•	Course creation and management

•	Student enrollment and tracking

•	Webinar scheduling and participation

•	Resource management (documents, videos, etc.)

•	AI-based recommendations and analytics

Limitations:

•	Requires internet connectivity

•	AI accuracy depends on available data

•	Limited third-party integrations in current version



	1.5 Technology

The system is developed using modern technologies to ensure scalability and performance:

Frontend & Backend: SvelteKit

Database: PostgreSQL / SQLite

Authentication: Role-based access system

AI Integration: External AI APIs

Existing systems such as traditional LMS platforms provide basic functionalities but lack advanced AI-driven features. This project builds upon those systems by incorporating intelligent automation and analytics.



Project Planning

1.6.1 Development Approach and Justification

The project follows an Agile development approach, allowing iterative development, continuous testing, and flexibility in incorporating new features. This approach is suitable due to the evolving nature of requirements and integration of AI components.

1.6.2 Effort, Time, and Cost Estimation

The project development is divided into phases including requirement analysis, design, development, testing, and deployment.

Requirement Analysis: 1–2 weeks

System Design: 2 weeks

Development: 4–6 weeks

Testing & Debugging: 2 weeks

Cost is minimized as the system uses open-source technologies and APIs.



1.6.3 Roles and Responsibilities

Developer: System design, coding, and implementation

Designer: UI/UX design and user experience optimization

Tester: Testing functionality and identifying bugs

Project Lead: Planning, coordination, and decision-making

1.6.4 Dependencies

Internet connectivity

Availability of AI APIs

System compatibility with browsers and devices

1.7 Project Scheduling

The project follows a structured timeline where each phase is completed sequentially with some overlap in development and testing phases. Agile sprints are used to track progress and ensure timely completion of tasks.



CHAPTER 2 – SYSTEM ANALYSIS





Study of Current System



The current learning and course management systems used by many institutions are either manual or partially digital. Traditional systems rely on paperwork and offline coordination, resulting in inefficiencies, redundancy, and difficulty in accessing data.

Existing digital systems provide limited functionalities and often operate in isolation, lacking integration between modules such as course management, student tracking, and resource sharing. Moreover, these systems do not incorporate intelligent features to enhance learning outcomes.



Problems in Current System



The major limitations of existing systems include:

Manual handling of course and student data

Difficulty in tracking student progress and performance

Lack of centralized resource management

Limited support for webinars and live learning

Absence of AI-based insights and automation

Poor scalability and flexibility





Requirements of New System



Functional Requirements

User registration and role-based authentication

Course creation and management

Student enrollment system

Webinar scheduling and participation

0Resource upload and access

Performance tracking

AI-based recommendations

AI learning assistant

Non-Functional Requirements

Scalability

Security

Reliability

User-friendly interface

Fast response time



System Feasibility

Organizational Objective



The system can be implemented using SvelteKit for full-stack development, PostgreSQL/SQLite for database management, and AI APIs for intelligent features.



Technical & Cost Feasibility



The use of open-source technologies minimizes development and operational costs.

Integration



The system is user-friendly and can be adopted easily by institutions and organizations.



Process in Proposed System



The proposed system is an AI Learning and Course Management Platform that integrates course management, student tracking, resource handling, and AI-driven functionalities into a unified system.





Use Case Diagram





Fig 2.1 Use Case Diagram

This diagram represents interactions between different user roles and the system functionalities, showing how each user engages with the platform.



Activity / Process of Proposed System

























































































Fig 2.2 Activity Diagram

This diagram illustrates the workflow of a student from login to course completion.



Data Flow Diagram (DFD - Level 1)







Fig 2.3 Data Flow Diagram

This diagram shows how data flows between users, system components, database, and AI modules.





















Features of Proposed System

Centralized course and user management

Seamless student enrollment

Webinar scheduling and management

Resource library

Performance tracking and analytics

AI-based recommendations

AI learning assistant



System Modules

The system is divided into the following modules:

Admin Module

Instructor Module

Student Module

Business Training Module

AI Module



Selection of Technology and Justification

The technologies are selected based on scalability, performance, and flexibility:

SvelteKit for full-stack development

PostgreSQL/SQLite for database management

AI APIs for intelligent features

Web-based architecture for cross-platform accessibility

These technologies ensure that the system is efficient, scalable, and future-ready.



CHAPTER 3 – SYSTEM DESIGN

3.1 System Design & Methodology



The system is designed using a modular and layered architecture to ensure scalability, maintainability, and performance. A client-server model is followed, where users interact through a web interface, and processing is handled on the server.

The development follows an Agile methodology, enabling iterative improvements, continuous testing, and flexibility in integrating AI features. 3.2 System Architecture Design



Fig 3.1 System Architecture Diagram

This diagram represents the three-tier architecture of the system, where the frontend handles user interaction, the backend processes logic, and the database stores data. AI APIs are integrated to provide intelligent functionalities.

3.3 Database Design (ER Diagram)

Fig 3.2 ER Diagram

This diagram defines the database structure and relationships between entities such as users, courses, enrollments, resources, webinars, and performance records.



3.4 Data Structure Design

The system uses structured relational data models:

•	Primary keys ensure unique identification of records

•	Foreign keys maintain relationships between entities

•	Indexed fields improve query performance

•	Normalization reduces redundancy and ensures data consistency

3.5 Input and Output Design

Input Design

Inputs to the system include:

•	User registration and login data

•	Course creation details

•	Enrollment requests

•	Resource uploads

•	Webinar scheduling

All inputs are validated to prevent incorrect or malicious data entry.

Output Design

Outputs generated by the system include:

•	Course listings and details

•	Student progress reports

•	Webinar schedules and summaries

•	AI-generated recommendations

•	Performance analytics dashboards

3.6 Interface Design

The system provides role-based dashboards:

•	Admin Dashboard: User and system management

•	Instructor Dashboard: Course creation and content management

•	Student Dashboard: Learning and progress tracking

•	Business Dashboard: Employee training monitoring

The interface is designed to be responsive, user-friendly, and accessible across devices.

3.7 Security and Access Control

Security is implemented using role-based access control mechanisms:

•	Authentication using secure login credentials

•	Authorization based on user roles

•	Data validation and sanitization

•	Protection against unauthorized access

3.8 Design Constraints

The system design is subject to the following constraints:

•	Requires stable internet connectivity

•	Performance depends on server capacity

•	AI features depend on external APIs

•	Cross-browser compatibility must be maintained

3.9 Design Justification

The chosen architecture and technologies ensure:

•	Scalability for handling multiple users

•	Efficient data management

•	Flexibility for future enhancements

•	Integration of AI without heavy infrastructure

This design provides a balance between performance, cost, and maintainability.



3.10 Project UI 

This section includes actual output screenshots of:

Login Page

Dashboard

Course Page

AI Recommendation Output

Performance Dashboard



































CHAPTER 4 – IMPLEMENTATION



 4.1 Implementation Environment

The system is developed using modern web technologies to ensure performance, scalability, and maintainability.

•	Frontend & Backend: SvelteKit

•	Database: PostgreSQL / SQLite

•	Programming Languages: JavaScript, HTML, CSS

•	AI Integration: External AI APIs

•	Development Tools: VS Code, Git

•	Browser Support: Chrome, Edge, Firefox

The implementation environment supports full-stack development and efficient deployment.

4.2 System Modules Implementation

The system is implemented in a modular manner, where each module performs specific functionalities.

4.2.1 Admin Module

•	Manage users and roles

•	Approve or remove courses

•	Monitor system activities

4.2.2 Instructor Module

•	Create and manage courses

•	Upload learning materials

•	Schedule webinars

4.2.3 Student Module

•	Register and log in

•	Enroll in courses

•	Access learning materials

•	Track progress

4.2.4 Business Training Module

•	Manage employee training programs

•	Track employee performance

4.2.5 AI Module

•	Course recommendation system

•	AI learning assistant

•	Performance analysis

4.3 Process and Technology Implementation

The system follows a client-server model:

•	Users interact through the frontend interface

•	Requests are processed by the backend server

•	Data is stored and retrieved from the database

•	AI APIs process data to generate intelligent outputs

The implementation ensures smooth communication between all components.

4.4 Key Functionalities Implemented

•	User authentication and role management

•	Course creation and enrollment system

•	Resource management (documents, videos)

•	Webinar scheduling and participation

•	Performance tracking dashboard

•	AI-based recommendations and assistant

4.5 Results and Outputs

The system successfully performs all major operations:

•	Efficient management of courses and users

•	Seamless enrollment process

•	Real-time access to learning resources

•	Improved tracking of student performance

•	AI-generated insights and recommendations

4.6 Result Analysis

The implemented system improves efficiency compared to traditional systems:

•	Reduces manual effort

•	Enhances user experience

•	Provides intelligent insights

•	Supports scalability

The integration of AI significantly improves personalization and decision-making.

4.7 Limitations in Implementation

•	AI features depend on external APIs

•	System performance depends on server capacity

•	Limited offline functionality

•	Advanced analytics features can be improved

4.8 Future Improvements in Implementation

•	Integration of mobile application

•	Advanced AI models for better recommendations

•	Improved analytics dashboard

•	Integration with external platforms

CHAPTER 5 – TESTING



5.1 Testing Strategy

The system is tested using a combination of manual and functional testing approaches to ensure that all modules operate correctly and meet the specified requirements.

The testing process includes:

•	Unit Testing for individual components

•	Integration Testing for module interaction

•	System Testing for overall functionality

•	User Acceptance Testing (UAT) for real-world usability

5.2 Testing Plan

The testing plan focuses on validating all major functionalities of the system, including user authentication, course management, enrollment, resource access, and AI features.

Each module is tested under different conditions to ensure reliability, accuracy, and performance.

5.3 Test Cases

Test ID

Test Condition

Expected Output

Actual Output

Result

TC01

User login with valid credentials

Successful login

Successful login

Pass

TC02

User login with invalid credentials

Error message

Error displayed

Pass

TC03

Course creation by instructor

Course created

Course created

Pass

TC04

Student enrollment

Enrollment successful

Enrollment successful

Pass

TC05

Resource upload

File uploaded

File uploaded

Pass

TC06

Webinar scheduling

Webinar scheduled

Webinar scheduled

Pass

TC07

AI recommendation

Relevant courses suggested

Courses suggested

Pass

TC08

Performance tracking

Progress displayed

Progress displayed

Pass

Table 5.3: Test Cases and Results



5.4 Test Results and Analysis

The test results indicate that all core functionalities of the system are working as expected. The system successfully handles user interactions, data processing, and AI-based operations without significant errors.

Minor issues encountered during testing were resolved during the debugging phase. The system demonstrates stability, reliability, and consistent performance.

5.5 Performance Testing

The system performs efficiently under normal usage conditions:

•	Fast response time for user requests

•	Smooth navigation between modules

•	Efficient database operations

•	Stable AI response generation



5.6 Security Testing

Security testing ensures that the system protects user data and prevents unauthorized access:

•	Authentication validation

•	Role-based access control verification

•	Input validation to prevent invalid data

•	Protection against unauthorized actions

5.7 Limitations of Testing

•	Testing performed on limited datasets

•	AI outputs may vary based on input data

•	Load testing for large-scale users is limited

5.8 Summary of Testing

The testing phase confirms that the system meets its functional and non-functional requirements. The platform is stable, secure, and ready for deployment with scope for future improvements. 

CHAPTER 6 – CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

6.1 Overall Analysis of Project Viability

The AI Learning and Course Management Platform proves to be a viable and effective solution for modern digital learning environments. The system successfully integrates course management, student tracking, resource handling, and AI-driven features into a unified platform.

From a technical perspective, the use of modern web technologies ensures scalability, performance, and maintainability. Economically, the system is cost-effective due to the use of open-source tools. Operationally, the platform is user-friendly and can be adopted by educational institutions and organizations with minimal training.

6.2 Problem Encountered and Solutions

During the development of the system, several challenges were encountered:

•	Integration of AI APIs:

Difficulty in handling responses and ensuring relevant outputs

Solution: Implemented structured data handling and filtering mechanisms

•	Data Management Complexity:

Managing relationships between multiple entities

Solution: Designed normalized database schema with proper relationships

•	User Role Management:

Ensuring secure and accurate access control

Solution: Implemented role-based authentication and authorization

•	Performance Optimization:

Handling multiple requests efficiently

Solution: Optimized database queries and modularized backend logic

6.3 Summary of Project Work

The project involved the complete development lifecycle including requirement analysis, system design, implementation, and testing. The platform supports multiple user roles and provides functionalities such as course creation, enrollment, webinar management, resource sharing, and performance tracking.

The integration of AI enhances the system by providing personalized recommendations, intelligent assistance, and performance insights.



6.4 Limitations

Despite its advantages, the system has certain limitations:

•	Dependence on internet connectivity

•	AI accuracy depends on available data

•	Limited advanced analytics in current version

•	Limited integration with external platforms

6.5 Future Enhancements

The system can be further improved by:

•	Developing a mobile application

•	Implementing advanced AI-based personalized learning paths

•	Enhancing analytics and reporting features

•	Integrating with third-party platforms (e.g., payment systems, external LMS)

•	Improving scalability for large-scale deployment

6.6 Final Conclusion

The developed system demonstrates how modern technologies and artificial intelligence can be combined to create an efficient and intelligent learning management platform. It improves both administrative processes and learning experiences, making it a valuable solution for educational institutions and organizations.

The project highlights the importance of integrating automation, data analysis, and user-centric design in building future-ready systems.



APPENDIX

Appendix A: Sample Screens (UI Representation)

The system includes multiple user interfaces for different roles:

Admin Dashboard (User & System Management)

Instructor Dashboard (Course Creation & Content Upload)s

Student Dashboard (Learning Interface & Progress Tracking)

Business Dashboard (Employee Training Management)



Appendix B: Sample Database Tables

User Table Example

ID

Name

Email

Role

1

John Doe

john@email.com

Student

2

Jane Smith

jane@email.com

Instructor

Table B.1

Course Table Example

ID

Title

Instructor

101

Web Development

Jane Smith

102

AI Basics

John Doe

Table B.2

Appendix C: Sample Code Snippet

// Example: User Authentication Logic

async function loginUser(email, password) {

    const user = await db.findUserByEmail(email);

    if (!user) return "User not found";



    if (user.password = = = password) {        return "Login Successful";

    } else { return "Invalid Credentials"; }

}



Appendix D: Test Case Details

Test ID

Input

Expected Output

Actual Output

TC01

Valid Login

Success

Success

TC02

Invalid Login

Error

Error

Table D.1



REFERENCES

P. Brusilovsky and E. Millán (2007), “User Models for Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Educational Systems,” The Adaptive Web, Springer, pp. 3–53.

S. Graf and Kinshuk (2010), “Advanced Adaptivity in Learning Management Systems by Considering Learning Styles,” Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, pp. 235–239.

D. Zhang, J. L. Zhao, L. Zhou, and J. F. Nunamaker (2004), “Can e-Learning Replace Classroom Learning?” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 47, No. 5, pp. 75–79.

R. S. Pressman (2014), Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 8th Edition, McGraw-Hill.

I. Sommerville (2016), Software Engineering, 10th Edition, Pearson Education.

PostgreSQL Global Development Group, “PostgreSQL Documentation,” Available at: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/

SvelteKit Documentation, “SvelteKit Framework Guide,” Available at: https://kit.svelte.dev/docs

OpenAI API Documentation, “AI Integration and Usage,” Available at: https://platform.openai.com/docs

MDN Web Docs, “Web Development Documentation,” Available at: https://developer.mozilla.org/

IEEE Xplore Digital Library, “Research Papers on E-Learning Systems,” Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/





